---
title: "The major and pentatonic scales: A juncture of mathematics and music"
---

To what extent does the major scale of Western music have mathematical origins? My findings suggest that there are both objective and cultural elements keeping the major scale near the center of Western music.

### Mathematical origins of the major scale

I will copy here the table of intervals from our discussion of the [consonant intervals]({{ "" | relative_url }}{% post_url 2020-11-01-just-intonation-ordering %}):

| Wavelength | Name |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| 2/3 | perfect fifth (inversion of perfect fourth) |
| 8/9 | major second (inversion of minor seventh)  |
| 3/5 | major sixth (inversion of minor third) |
| 4/5 | major third (inversion of minor sixth) |
| 8/15 | major seventh (inversion of minor second) |
| 32/45 | diminished fifth (inversion of itself) |
| 15/16 | minor second (inversion of major seventh) |
| 5/8 | minor sixth (inversion of major third) |
| 5/6 | minor third (inversion of major sixth) |
| 9/16 | minor seventh (inversion of major second) |
| 3/4 | perfect fourth (inversion of perfect fifth) |
| 1/2 | octave |

Observe that major intervals cluster around first few notes generated by the perfect fifth. However, the perfect fourth lags behind until the end. However, note that the (very dissonant) diminished fifth crudely approximates the perfect fourth. Excising the diminished fifth and everything below it until the perfect fourth, we obtain the notes of the major scale:

| Wavelength | Name |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| 2/3 | perfect fifth (inversion of perfect fourth) |
| 8/9 | major second (inversion of minor seventh)  |
| 3/5 | major sixth (inversion of minor third) |
| 4/5 | major third (inversion of minor sixth) |
| 8/15 | major seventh (inversion of minor second) |
| 3/4 | perfect fourth (inversion of perfect fifth) |
| 1/2 | octave |

Observe the narrow gaps between the third and the fourth, and the seventh and the octave, well known as the two half steps occurring in the major scale. This is due to our approximation of the diminished fifth by the perfect fourth. It is the wisdom of this approximation that I have trouble with: On one hand, the diminished fifth is the most dissonant note, and its removal is welcome. On the other hand, a roughly half step fudge between the perfect fourth and diminished fifth is questionable. Western history seems to have settled in large part on the former.

### Mathematical origins of the pentatonic scale

The pentatonic scale is less well known to classical pianists (as far as I am aware). I only discovered it recently. In a nutshell, it is the scale consisting of the black keys on a piano. 

However, the mathematical origins seem to be motivated in a way similar to our discussion for the major scale. In the chart above, the major seventh is less egregious than the diminished fifth, but still a dissonant interval. Excising by approximating it by an octave, we obtain 

| Wavelength | Name |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| 2/3 | perfect fifth (inversion of perfect fourth) |
| 8/9 | major second (inversion of minor seventh)  |
| 3/5 | major sixth (inversion of minor third) |
| 4/5 | major third (inversion of minor sixth) |
| 1/2 | octave |

Similar to the major scale, there is a major second step between the 



I have an admission to make: It takes me too long - perhaps a second or two - to recall the names of notes written on the staff (I do a better job of it if I'm sitting at a piano). I discovered this when trying to copy sheet music into Musescore the other day. However, I'm not ashamed of this. There is essentially no meaning to the lettered names of the notes; they are merely a semantic-less anthropogenic convention.

This brings me to today's question: What are the principles guiding the _longform_ names of the intervals?

### Scale degree names

<div id="scale"></div>
<script>
makeInteractive("scale", `
X:1
K:C
L: 1/4
Q:1/4=60
CDEFGAB
w: tonic supertonic mediant subdominant dominant submediant leading~tone
`);
D('scale').style.display = "none";
</script>

It turns out this chart is anachronistic. Below is the more revealing chart:

<div id="scale2"></div>
<script>
makeInteractive("scale2", `
X:1
K:C
L: 1/4
Q:1/4=60
C[D_B,][EA,][GF,]
w: tonic supertonic/subtonic mediant/submediant dominant/subdominant
`);
D('scale2').style.display = "none";
</script>


1. The _tonic_ is obviously very important and probably has etymological origins common with the word "tone."
2. The _dominant_ is a perfect fifth above the tonic, also quite important. The _subdominant_ is a perfect fifth below the tonic.
3. _Mediant_ means "middle," and it lies approximately halfway between the tonic and dominant. Likewise, _submediant_ lies halfway between tonic and subdominant.
4. Supertonic and subtonic are whole steps above and below the tonic, respectively.

In particular, note that the major scale has a leading tone, instead of a subtonic which appears in natural and melodic minor scales. Also note that these names are preserved between major and minor scales, so other than the dominant and subdominant, this is not about [interval consonance]({{ "" | relative_url }}{% post_url 2020-11-03-just-intonation-ordering %}), as I initially suspected.
