---
title: "The major and pentatonic scales: A juncture of mathematics and music"
---

To what extent does the major scale of Western music have mathematical origins? To what extent is it ingrained through habituation? My findings suggest that there are both objective and cultural elements keeping the major scale near the center of Western classical music. Evidence for this is reflected in the fact that Asian cultures often center instead around the pentatonic scale.

### Mathematical origins of the major scale

I will copy here the table of intervals from our discussion of the [consonant intervals]({{ "" | relative_url }}{% post_url 2020-11-03-just-intonation-ordering %}):

| Wavelength | Name |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| 2/3 | perfect fifth (inversion of perfect fourth) |
| 8/9 | major second (inversion of minor seventh)  |
| 3/5 | major sixth (inversion of minor third) |
| 4/5 | major third (inversion of minor sixth) |
| 8/15 | major seventh (inversion of minor second) |
| 32/45 | diminished fifth (inversion of itself) |
| 15/16 | minor second (inversion of major seventh) |
| 5/8 | minor sixth (inversion of major third) |
| 5/6 | minor third (inversion of major sixth) |
| 9/16 | minor seventh (inversion of major second) |
| 3/4 | perfect fourth (inversion of perfect fifth) |
| 1/2 | octave |

Observe that major intervals cluster around first few notes generated by the perfect fifth. However, the perfect fourth lags behind until the end. 

Note that the (very dissonant) diminished fifth crudely approximates the perfect fourth. Excising the diminished fifth and everything below it until the perfect fourth, we obtain the notes of the major scale:

| Wavelength | Name |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| 2/3 | perfect fifth (inversion of perfect fourth) |
| 8/9 | major second (inversion of minor seventh)  |
| 3/5 | major sixth (inversion of minor third) |
| 4/5 | major third (inversion of minor sixth) |
| 8/15 | major seventh (inversion of minor second) |
| 3/4 | perfect fourth (inversion of perfect fifth) |
| 1/2 | octave |

Observe the narrow gaps between the third and the fourth, and the seventh and the octave, well known as the two half steps occurring in the major scale. This is due to our approximation of the diminished fifth by the perfect fourth. It is the wisdom of this approximation that prevents me from claiming a pure mathematical origin: On one hand, the diminished fifth is the most dissonant note, and its removal is welcome. On the other hand, a roughly half step error between the perfect fourth and diminished fifth is questionable.

### Mathematical origins of the pentatonic scale

The pentatonic scale is less well known to classical pianists (as far as I am aware). I only discovered it recently. In a nutshell, it is the scale consisting of the black keys on a piano:

However, the mathematical origins seem to be motivated in a way similar to our discussion for the major scale. In the chart above, the major seventh is less egregious than the diminished fifth, but still a dissonant interval. Excising by approximating it by an octave, we obtain 

| Wavelength | Name |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| 2/3 | perfect fifth (inversion of perfect fourth) |
| 8/9 | major second (inversion of minor seventh)  |
| 3/5 | major sixth (inversion of minor third) |
| 4/5 | major third (inversion of minor sixth) |
| 1/2 | octave |

Similar to the major scale, there are wide minor third gaps between the third and the fifth, and the sixth and the octave. 
