---
title: "Temperament: Fudging consonances"
---

Recall from our [discussion of consonance]({{ "" | relative_url }}{% post_url 2020-11-01-the-circle-of-fifths-why-there %}) the list of small integer ratios:

$$\frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{3}, \frac{1}{5}, \frac{1}{7}, \frac{3}{5}, \frac{3}{7}, \frac{5}{7}.$$

There, we discussed the ratios 1/2 (octave equivalence) and 1/3 (the perfect fifth). The next most consonant wavelength ratio of 1/5 essentially corresponds to a major third. As written, this interval is larger than two octaves; an actual major third corresponds to lowering the higher note of the interval by two octaves, for a 4 to 5 ratio.

The reason we do not introduce these wavelengths as new notes is simply that there are already too many, with 12 notes generated by the perfect fifths alone. In particular, we may approximate

$$\frac{4}{5} \approx \frac{2^6}{3^4}.$$

The hope is that all other consonant intervals may be similarly approximated by such ratios.

### Meantone temperament

The note generation scheme outlined so far using the [circle of fifths]({{ "" | relative_url }}{% post_url 2020-11-01-the-circle-of-fifths-why-there %}) is known as the _Pythagorean tuning_ and strongly favors perfect fifths, at the cost of the major third and other consonant intervals. 

_Temperament_ refers to any system which adjusts note wavelengths to compromise between these consonant intervals. Meantone temperament, introduced in the 16th century, "redefines 3" into say, $$\tilde 3$$ so that

$$\frac{4}{5} = \frac{2^6}{\tilde 3^4}.$$

This means that major thirds sound as they should, but also that the perfect fifth is replaced by a tempered fifth. However, the error in $$\tilde 3$$ is essentially the fourth root of the error for the major third in Pythagorean tuning, which is acceptable.
